.TH RNAmmer 1 "February 2006" 
.SH NAME
RNAmmer \- predicts ribosomal RNA genes in prokaryotic genome sequences
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrnammer\fP [\fB\-S kingdom\fP] [\fB\-m molecules\fP]  [\fB\-xml xml-file\fP] [\fB\-gff gff-file\fP] [\fB\-d\fP] [\fB\-p\fP] [\fB\-h hmmreport\fP] [\fB\-f fasta-file\fP] [\fIsequence\fP]

or

\fBrnammer\fP [\fB\-S kingdom\fP] [\fB\-m molecules\fP]  [\fB\-xml xml-file\fP] [\fB\-gff gff-file\fP] [\fB\-d\fP] [\fB\-p\fP] [\fB\-h hmmreport\fP] [\fB\-f fasta-file\fP] < [\fIsequence\fP]


.SH CORE
\fBcore\-rnammer\fP [\fIconfiguration\fP]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B RNAmmer
predicts ribosomal RNA genes in full genome sequences by utilising 
two levels of Hidden Markov Models: An initial spotter model searches both 
strands. The spotter model is constructed from highly conserved loci
within a structural alignment of known rRNA sequences. Once the spotter
model detects an approximate position of a gene, flanking regions are
extracted and parsed to the full model which matches the entire gene. 
By enabling a two-level approach it is avoided to run a full model through
an entire genome sequence allowing faster predictions.

RNAmmer consists of two components: A core Perl program, '\fIcore\-rnammer\fP',
and a wrapper, '\fIrnammer\fP'. The wrapper sets up the search by writing on or more
temporary configuration(s). The wrapper requires the super kingdom of the input 
sequence (bacterial, archaeal, or eukaryotic) and the molecule type (5/8, 16/17s, 
and 23/28s) to search for. When the configuration files are written, they are 
parsed in parallel to individual instances of the core program. Each instance of 
the core program will in parallel search both strands, so a maximum of 3x2 hmmsearch 
processes will run simultanously.


The input sequences are read from \fIsequence\fP or. The input must be in 
Pearson \fBFASTA\fP format. When using the core program, input \fIconfiguration\fP
must in RNAmmer configuration file format (see documentation below)

The output is controlled by options h (hmmreport), and f (fasta).

.SH REQUIREMENTS
.B The main executable '\fIrnammer\fP' requires the core RNAmmer program '\fIcore-rnammer\fP'. The 
core program requires the binary 'hmmsearch' (http://hmmer.wustl.edu/)

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-S
Specifies the super kingdom of the input sequence. Can be either 'arc', 'bac', or 'euk'.

.TP
.B \-gff output gff file
Specifies filename for output in GFF version 2 output

.TP
.B \-multi
Runs all molecules and both strands in parallel

.TP
.B \-f fasta
Specifies filename for output fasta file of predicted rRNA genes

.TP
.B \-h hmmreport
Specifies filename for output HMM report.

.TP
.B \-m
Molecule type can be 'tsu' for 5/8s rRNA, 'ssu' for 16/18s rRNA, 'lsu' for 23/28s rRNA or any combination seperated by comma.

.TP
.I [sequence]
The input file to process. 

.SH EXAMPLE
../rnammer -S bac -m lsu,ssu,tsu -xml ecoli.xml -gff ecoli.gff -h ecoli.hmmreport < ecoli.fsa

core-rnammer configuration.cf

.SH AUTHORS
Peter Fischer Hallin (pfh@cbs.dtu.dk)
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis (CBS)
Technical University of Denmark
February 2006

.SH REFERENCES
RNAmmer: consistent annotation of rRNA genes in genomic sequences
Lagesen K, Hallin PF, Rodland EA, Staerfeldt HH, Rognes T, and Ussery DW. 
.br
Manuscript in preparation

Information and web-service can be found at the internet address:

http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/RNAmmer/
.SH SEE ALSO
fasta(1), hmmsearch(1)
